---
layout: blog
title: A huge minCPU update is near
date: 2025-04-27 17:46 +0300
---
Hi! You may have noticed that minCPU-16 hasn't been updated for a while.\
Well, that's because I'm planning on simplifying minCPU-16 architecture.\
Sadly, that'll probably make it incompatible with older programs.

## Instruction syntax

Previously, minCPU's instructions looked like this:
```
Opcode -- 2 bytes (first is 00)
Arg #1 -- 2 bytes
...
Arg #n -- 2 bytes
```
The number of arguments was unlimited.

The new syntax is this:
```
Opcode -- 2 bytes
Arg #1 -- 2 bytes
Arg #2 -- 2 bytes
```

Now, every instruction has only 2 arguments. It makes easiser for the
emulator to handle arguments and opcodes, although it can make the ROM bigger.\
You don't need to worry about that when coding for minASM.

Though you can squeeze something there, like a 4-byte message or something:
```
FFFF 6D43 5055  ; opening this in a notepad or whatever will show mCPU here
```

## Argument types
minCPU-16 is getting rid of two bits per argument to determine argument type.
Instead, instruction table gets bloated with each combination of argument types
per instruction.
Like ST gets expanded to STMI, STMM, STMP, STMR, STMO, STPI, STPM, STPP, STPR, STPO, STRI, STRM, STRP, STRR, STRO, STOI, STOM, STOP, STOR and STOO.\
This is a big change but we can afford that since opcodes are 16-bit.

By the way, the way you use registers, pointers, etc. is different now.

Now you can have a whole 16-bit range for RAM.\
For 8-bit (byte) registers you got a 256 byte area from $0000 to $00FF\
For 16-bit (word) registers you also got a 256 byte area, from $8000 to $80FF\
Special registers have $FF prefix:
 - PC &mdash; $FF00
 - ACC &mdash; $FF01
 - ERR &mdash; $FF02
 - BOOL &mdash; $FF03

## Memory layout
In minEMU, old memory layout looked like this:
```
$4000-$4FFF -- ROM
$5000-$7FFF -- RAM
$8000-$BFFF -- Pointers
$C000-$CF04 -- Registers
```
The new layout looks like this:
```
$0000-$BFFF -- RAM
$C000-$DFFF -- Other I/O (like sound cards, stuff like that)
$E000-$FFFF -- ROM, Video (terminal/graphics)
```

It's inspired by Commodore 64 memory layout, with ROM and Video sections combined into one.
You can write to ROM section, but that'll write to RAM instead.\
While you still can read original ROM code, video card will always read from RAM instead,
just like C64's one did.

---

I hope these changes will make your coding experience for minCPU-16 much better.\
Note that the minEMU graphics card, minASM, and all that stuff aren't ready yet.
This post is a roadmap for the next update, but the final update may or may not be like this. 